Um, back.
John, thank you so much for, um, attending again.
Um, and, uh, we appreciate you coming back
to see the committee again.
And, uh, the reason that we have asked you back is on the
30th of July, a hearing with you.
And at that hearing, um, you were asked, um,
if New Zealanders could expect a difference between, uh, you
as on Ombudsman compared with your predecessor.
And at that time, you, you, uh, you responded,
but you did not respond
that there would be a difference in approach.
However, later that afternoon, on the 30th of July,
your office sent out around 250 odd letters
to organizations covered
by the Official Information Act stating that there would be,
uh, a change in the process undertaken by your predecessor,
uh, in relation to complaints about the Official Information
Act responses would no longer be
formally investigated as a matter of course.
And so we've invited you back to provide an explanation as
to why, um, in your role, um, in response to that question,
you did not provide the information, um,
to the select committee when asked,
Thank you. And thank you for
the opportunity to, uh, come back
and talk about, uh, this issue.
I regret, uh, that I am back, uh, to talk about the issue
and that I didn't make it clear, uh, at the time
that I was in front of the committee,
I could have used this as an example.
Uh, indeed what I did, in fact is speak at a high level, uh,
about the nature of changes that I might make,
but also the recognition of commonality in objective
between the work that Peter had done, uh,
and the work that I'm doing.
Uh, the idea that I'm building as I see it, uh,
on the foundations, uh, which he has laid.
There were two reasons for that.
Uh, primarily, uh,
the first was the administrative nature of the change.
So as you will see in the little paper that's been, uh,
circulated, if you go to page two of that document, uh,
the change between what is described as the formal process,
which was the process that Peter was operating at the time
and has been operated previously by others, uh,
and the, uh, resolution focus, which is the current, uh,
model, uh, has been moved between those two,
those two approaches, uh, by all ombudsman, uh, over period,
over the past decades.
So Beverly Waken, uh,
and Peter Bocher operated under both models.
Uh, the decision to move from one
to the other really depends.
It's, it's, I I suppose almost it's about, uh, sort
of keeping people focused, uh, on the issue.
If over a period of time people get used to a particular way
of operating, uh, a change resets that
and requires them then to, uh, uh, to rethink, uh,
or puts a higher priority on thinking around the space.
So that was the first reason, the administrative nature
of the, um, uh, the issue.
Uh, and the second primary reason, uh, was that I wanted to
engage the agencies
because obviously if you're going to the informal process,
the agency engagement is centrally important.
Uh, rather than have them read about this, uh, in the media
before they have heard about it from me.
So I do recognize that I could have,
and perhaps should have, uh, used the example, uh,
to illustrate, uh, the sorts of shifts that can occur, uh,
during the period of an ombudsman's term, uh,
and that this shift, uh, is entirely normal,
uh, within the context of previous two Ombudsman's terms.
The purpose of the shift, of course, uh, is to try
and get information in the hands of the people
who have requested it more quickly
and get agencies
to make decisions on the information more quickly.
And the evidence suggests, uh,
that this resolution approach
does deliver that outcome.
And indeed, we're seeing that right now
in the improved timeliness that we are achieving
and getting decisions from agencies
and getting information into the hands of the people
who are requesting it.
Uh, and you'll see the 97 to 50, uh, number,
and we, I expect that will further,
potentially significantly, uh, over the next period.
And what I'd say to the committee is that while I absolutely
recognize, uh, the reason you've asked me back,
and I, I have explained my rationale for that,
and I have expressed my regret that I didn't, um,
utilize this as an example, uh, in, uh, presenting to you.
Uh, I do believe it's the right decision.
Uh, and I do believe particularly going into an election
year when there'll be particular pressure, uh,
in this space, uh, that being able to deliver
that information in a timely way, uh, is going
to be important, uh, to many, many people, um,
around the country.
So that's the reason, uh, the result
to date suggests that that reason has been, uh, you know,
that, that, uh, the decision has been, uh,
so far successful.
Uh, I expect to see further improvement.
Perhaps I could just say that as the committee know,
timeliness and improving the timeliness
of our performance has been a major focus, uh, for me
in the time that I have been in this office.
Uh, and you will see in this little report, uh,
our latest results across all of our complaints.
That's not, so the last three bullet points on the third
page, uh, oh, well, sorry,
last two bullet points On first page, uh, which says this,
uh, we are meeting all of our office wide targets,
completing 70% of all complaints within three months,
and 80% within six months.
We haven't done that for a very long time.
Uh, so we are seeing some significant improvements in
performance on timeliness, uh, across the office.
Uh, and I'm very pleased with that progress.
Thank you. I'll just check if committee members have, um,
any questions to follow up.
Um, I just wanted to ask about the substance of that change,
and thank you for your explanation.
Um, and we look forward to having, um, candid and, um,
and open discussions with you in the future.
The substance of this change,
although you can see in this report, which we've,
we've just received now, so I'll have a look at that, um,
after the meeting, although that indicates that you've
had improvements in timeliness, isn't the decision not
to automatically investigate when there are breaches
of the act taking away, uh, some of the force, uh,
in relation to people's, uh, decision to comply
with the Official Information Act?
No, I don't think
So. Isn't that,
uh, gonna be a disincentive, uh, an incentive
for some people to delay information?
I know that you can take an overall approach,
but when there's a particular piece of information that, um,
maybe an agency does not want to disclose, then
previously they knew that that would be investigated, um,
as per course by the ombudsman.
Now they know that there's a chance that that won't happen.
No, there isn't a chance there, there if,
if they don't release the information, we will investigate
and we will publish an adverse opinion.
Uh, so, so if we don't achieve the early resolution,
we progress to the through
what would be the standard formal process.
So you'll commit to, to, if there isn't any improvement,
investigating every instance of non-compliance. Correct.
Uh, and eventually, and what I mean by
that is at the moment, we are, we are doing that
for about 10%, uh, under this new approach, about 10%, uh,
not being able to be resolved
or have not been resolved in the, uh,
in the early resolution, uh, phase or through that approach.
Uh, and as a consequence, we've gone to provisional opinion,
uh, and final, uh, and letters to ministers.
And the incentive for agencies remember, is not just
that they're actually providing a better service to, uh,
people of New Zealand,
but it's also that letter to HR to the ministers, uh,
that they, they don't get that, um, being issued, uh,
if they focus on it early, uh,
and get it done early. Sure,
Yeah. Um, tha thanks for coming to us. Um, no doubt.
We'll see you soon for an annual review separately.
But I guess my, my, my one bit of, um,
my one comment maybe in response to this, uh,
is not about the change start changing approach
that you've taken, but, uh, I,
I think I'm just a little weary from maybe the time
of your predecessor that every report came
and said, we're busier than ever before.
Things are harder than ever before,
but don't worry, we are, you know,
we are 70% fast over three months and 80% over six months.
I'm not doubting that what you're saying is correct,
and in fact, in this year's annual report, we see, um,
you know, in early turning of, um, the number
of cases being, um, completed relative
to cost is actually improving
and relative to the staff for the first time in the,
in the 12 annual reports I read.
Um, but,
but I think sometimes we, we just, I would be really helpful
to just get the, the, the unvarnished truth of
how things actually set.
And, and if I reflect on the, the, the last time we saw you,
the, the chart that you brought along,
and that looked like it was getting busy,
but it wasn't a rolling total, it was just July plus August.
So I think if we could just may maybe for the new approach,
uh, a new Chief Ombudsman and,
and moving forward, have a really,
I I don't know if there's been a culture where the, um, uh,
the office has found it needs to over it's case.
Um, but,
but it would be helpful just to, just to say,
look, actually things aren't improving.
Yes. You know, expenditure has gone up under budget still
for the last year by 7 million, which is great,
but it's still that continual increase,
and that is showing some results.
But, but equally, you know, when we look at staff numbers
and things, it would just be nice to, yeah.
Uh, so, uh, thanks Tim.
I, I, number one, I will always try
to give you an unvarnished view.
Uh, I suppose that's a bit, a bit challenging
to say in the context of this particular meeting, but,
but I, I will always try
and give you an unvarnished view of what's,
uh, what's happening.
Uh, number two, we are doing a project at the moment
that I think will be helpful in this context
where looking at the, what,
how do you measure the effectiveness
of the office of an onwards spot?
Uh, and, uh, because my view, a lot of the metrics
that we've used in the past, it's very difficult
to draw a direct correlation
or any, any real correlation between the actual work we do,
uh, and the outcome that we are, um,
measuring ourselves against.
So if I take for example, the transparency index, uh,
while obviously New Zealand's position in the transparency
index is useful, and,
and it's good that we are, uh, seen as being transparent,
um, it's very difficult to draw a direct correlation
with the work of the ombudsman other than at a sort
of intellectual narrative level that as a consequence,
the work we do, public Trump come, people can get access
to information and that may improve, um, you know,
uh, engagement.
So we are doing a lot of work in that space.
And so you will see that reflected in our 20, uh, 6 27,
uh, SOI, uh,
and in the programs, uh, that, that are going forward
after that, we're also in the, in the middle
of a consultation, uh, process in the, uh, office
around a change proposal in the office.
Um, that off that, that is not around headcount.
Uh, it is around, uh, organizing the headcount that we have,
uh, in a more effective way against the priorities
of the organization to deliver more impact.
And so some of the efficiencies that you are referring
to are coming as a consequence of deliberate action, uh,
and change which we are implementing, uh,
in the organization.
Uh, the third point that I would make is that yes,
it is true that, uh, our, the number
of complaints continue to rise.
Uh, they're up 30%, just if you want a number, it's 36%,
something like that, um, year to date.
Are they really, that's not what your annual report says?
No, no, but this is this year, 25, 26 year. Right. Okay.
I apologize. Um, so, so, uh, uh, so you know,
they are continuing to rise,
but you are right that, uh, the, the opportunity for us
to better deploy technology, uh, to, through the sort
of focus that I'm talking about here, uh,
become more efficient in the way in which we are operating,
both in terms of how we triage our complaints
and how we, uh, how we use our resource in the areas
that most matter to us, um, does make a difference.
And so, yeah, or,
or I suppose what I'm trying to say to you is, uh,
we won't over egg it.
Uh, we will try and give you the unvarnished to truth, uh,
and we are doing a lot of work, uh, to make sure we are
as efficient as we possibly can be, uh, in the context of,
uh, these sorts of pressures.
Thank you, Tom. Um,
Why does it take more than six months to
resolve one in five of the complaints that you received?
Uh, for the, for the, in the, um, uh, de, uh, delay space?
Yeah. Yes. So the answer is if you go, if you go
through the full process, then what you do is you publish a,
you, you produce a provisional opinion,
which is our standard model, a provisional opinion, uh,
on the outcome of that case that goes to the agency
for feedback and to the complainant,
for the complainant for feedback.
We get that feedback, then we produce a final opinion,
which goes to the agency, uh,
and the agency then comes back to us, uh, to, uh,
advise their approach to the recommendations
that have been made.
All of those steps take time.
Uh, and so in some instances where we are still going
through those processes, you get cases that are more,
you know, that, that have taken longer periods of time
in most cases, right at the moment.
What we are doing instead is we are triaging those
cases immediately.
Mm-hmm. Uh, we are giving them to a dedicated team
who are focused on the OIA complaints,
the team are calling
and talking to the agency immediately about
or nearly immediately, right?
And early in that process, um, about the issue
and how they might resolve it.
Uh, and often in that telephone type exchange, uh,
we are getting an agreement to a resolution
and to a release of the information.
Uh, and, uh, we are able
to close those complaints without any, uh, po
or, uh, provisional opinion or final opinion.
So the, the reason you're getting that variation, uh,
and you've we're still not quite, you know,
where I think we ultimately will be, uh, is
because there's that 10% of, um, cases at the moment, uh,
right now that are going, still going to that, uh,
through that full process. Thank
You. Thank
you. We've, um, run out of time now, um, for you,
but thank you very much for coming back
and one of the questions I didn't have the time to ask was,
um, what other changes you have, um, in,
uh, mind for the office.
So maybe we can raise that with you when, uh,
you attend for the annual your review.
Very happy to answer. I'm seeing you get.